The Project Gutenberg EBook of With These Hands, by C.M. Kornbluth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: With These Hands

Author: C.M. Kornbluth

Release Date: March 22, 2016 [EBook #51531]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH THESE HANDS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           With These Hands

                          By C. M. KORNBLUTH

                      Illustrated by KARL ROGERS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction December 1951.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                No self-respecting artist can object to
                suffering for his art ... but not in a
             society where art is outdated by technology!


I

Halvorsen waited in the Chancery office while Monsignor Reedy disposed
of three persons who had preceded him. He was a little dizzy with
hunger and noticed only vaguely that the prelate's secretary was
beckoning to him. He started to his feet when the secretary pointedly
opened the door to Monsignor Reedy's inner office and stood waiting
beside it.

The artist crossed the floor, forgetting that he had leaned his
portfolio against his chair, remembered at the door and went back for
it, flushing. The secretary looked patient.

"Thanks," Halvorsen murmured to him as the door closed.

There was something wrong with the prelate's manner.

"I've brought the designs for the Stations, Padre," he said, opening
the portfolio on the desk.

"Bad news, Roald," said the monsignor. "I know how you've been looking
forward to the commission--"

"Somebody else get it?" asked the artist faintly, leaning against the
desk. "I thought his eminence definitely decided I had the--"

"It's not that," said the monsignor. "But the Sacred Congregation
of Rites this week made a pronouncement on images of devotion.
Stereopantograph is to be licit within a diocese at the discretion of
the bishop. And his eminence--"

"S.P.G.--slimy imitations," protested Halvorsen. "Real as a plastic
eye. No texture. No guts. _You_ know that, Padre!" he said accusingly.

"I'm sorry, Roald," said the monsignor. "Your work is better than we'll
get from a stereopantograph--to my eyes, at least. But there are other
considerations."

"Money!" spat the artist.

"Yes, money," the prelate admitted. "His eminence wants to see the St.
Xavier U. building program through before he dies. Is that a mortal
sin? And there are our schools, our charities, our Venus mission.
S.P.G. will mean a considerable saving on procurement and maintenance
of devotional images. Even if I could, I would not disagree with his
eminence on adopting it as a matter of diocesan policy."

The prelate's eyes fell on the detailed drawings of the Stations of the
Cross and lingered.

"Your St. Veronica," he said abstractedly. "Very fine. It suggests one
of Caravaggio's care-worn saints to me. I would have liked to see her
in the bronze."

"So would I," said Halvorsen hoarsely. "Keep the drawings, Padre." He
started for the door.

"But I can't--"

"That's all right."

The artist walked past the secretary blindly and out of the Chancery
into Fifth Avenue's spring sunlight. He hoped Monsignor Reedy was
enjoying the drawings and was ashamed of himself and sorry for
Halvorsen. And he was glad he didn't have to carry the heavy portfolio
any more. Everything seemed so heavy lately--chisels, hammer, wooden
palette. Maybe the padre would send him something and pretend it was
for expenses or an advance, as he had in the past.

Halvorsen's feet carried him up the Avenue. No, there wouldn't be
any advances any more. The last steady trickle of income had just
been dried up, by an announcement in _Osservatore Romano_. Religious
conservatism had carried the church as far as it would go in its
ancient role of art patron.

When all Europe was writing on the wonderful new vellum, the church
stuck to good old papyrus. When all Europe was writing on the wonderful
new paper, the church stuck to good old vellum. When all architects
and municipal monument committees and portrait bust clients were
patronizing the stereopantograph, the church stuck to good old
expensive sculpture. But not any more.

He was passing an S.P.G. salon now, where one of his Tuesday night
pupils worked: one of the few men in the classes. Mostly they consisted
of lazy, moody, irritable girls. Halvorsen, surprised at himself,
entered the salon, walking between asthenic semi-nude stereos executed
in transparent plastic that made the skin of his neck and shoulders
prickle with gooseflesh.

_Slime!_ he thought. _How can they--_

"May I help--oh, hello, Roald. What brings you here?"

He knew suddenly what had brought him there. "Could you make a little
advance on next month's tuition, Lewis? I'm strapped." He took a
nervous look around the chamber of horrors, avoiding the man's
condescending face.

"I guess so, Roald. Would ten dollars be any help? That'll carry us
through to the 25th, right?"

"Fine, right, sure," he said, while he was being unwillingly towed
around the place.

"I know you don't think much of S.P.G., but it's quiet now, so this is
a good chance to see how we work. I don't say it's Art with a capital
A, but you've got to admit it's _an_ art, something people like at a
price they can afford to pay. Here's where we sit them. Then you run
out the feelers to the reference points on the face. You know what they
are?"

He heard himself say dryly: "I know what they are. The Egyptian
sculptors used them when they carved statues of the pharaohs."

"Yes? I never knew that. There's nothing new under the Sun, is there?
But _this_ is the heart of the S.P.G." The youngster proudly swung open
the door of an electronic device in the wall of the portrait booth.
Tubes winked sullenly at Halvorsen.

"The esthetikon?" he asked indifferently. He did not feel indifferent,
but it would be absurd to show anger, no matter how much he felt
it, against a mindless aggregation of circuits that could calculate
layouts, criticize and correct pictures for a desired effect--and that
had put the artist of design out of a job.

"Yes. The lenses take sixteen profiles, you know, and we set the
esthetikon for whatever we want--cute, rugged, sexy, spiritual, brainy,
or a combination. It fairs curves from profile to profile to give us
just what we want, distorts the profiles themselves within limits if it
has to, and there's your portrait stored in the memory tank waiting to
be taped. You set your ratio for any enlargement or reduction you want
and play it back. I wish we were reproducing today; it's fascinating to
watch. You just pour in your cold-set plastic, the nozzles ooze out a
core and start crawling over to scan--a drop here, a worm there, and it
begins to take shape.

"We mostly do portrait busts here, the Avenue trade, but Wilgus,
the foreman, used to work in a monument shop in Brooklyn. He did
that heroic-size war memorial on the East River Drive--hired Garda
Bouchette, the TV girl, for the central figure. And what a figure!
He told me he set the esthetikon plates for three-quarter sexy,
one-quarter spiritual. Here's something interesting--standing figurine
of Orin Ryerson, the banker. He ordered twelve. Figurines are coming
in. The girls like them because they can show their shapes. You'd be
surprised at some of the poses they want to try--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Somehow, Halvorsen got out with the ten dollars, walked to Sixth Avenue
and sat down hard in a cheap restaurant. He had coffee and dozed a
little, waking with a guilty start at a racket across the street. There
was a building going up. For a while he watched the great machines pour
walls and floors, the workmen rolling here and there on their little
chariots to weld on a wall panel, stripe on an electric circuit of
conductive ink, or spray plastic finish over the "wired" wall, all
without leaving the saddles of their little mechanical chariots.

Halvorsen felt more determined. He bought a paper from a vending
machine by the restaurant door, drew another cup of coffee and turned
to the help-wanted ads.

The tricky trade-school ads urged him to learn construction work and
make big money. Be a plumbing-machine setup man. Be a house-wiring
machine tender. Be a servotruck driver. Be a lumber-stacker operator.
Learn pouring-machine maintenance.

_Make big money!_

A sort of panic overcame him. He ran to the phone booth and dialed a
Passaic number. He heard the _ring-ring-ring_ and strained to hear
old Mr. Krehbeil's stumping footsteps growing louder as he neared the
phone, even though he knew he would hear nothing until the receiver was
picked up.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ring--ring--ring._ "Hello?" grunted the old man's voice, and his face
appeared on the little screen. "Hello, Mr. Halvorsen. What can I do for
you?"

Halvorsen was tongue-tied. He couldn't possibly say: I just wanted to
see if you were still there. I was afraid you weren't there any more.
He choked and improvised: "Hello, Mr. Krehbeil. It's about the banister
on the stairs in my place. I noticed it's pretty shaky. Could you come
over sometime and fix it for me?"

Krehbeil peered suspiciously out of the screen. "I could do that," he
said slowly. "I don't have much work nowadays. But you can carpenter
as good as me, Mr. Halvorsen, and frankly you're very slow pay and I
like cabinet work better. I'm not a young man and climbing around
on ladders takes it out of me. If you can't find anybody else, I'll
take the work, but I got to have some of the money first, just for the
materials. It isn't easy to get good wood any more."

"All right," said Halvorsen. "Thanks, Mr. Krehbeil. I'll call you if I
can't get anybody else."

He hung up and went back to his table and newspaper. His face was
burning with anger at the old man's reluctance and his own foolish
panic. Krehbeil didn't realize they were both in the same leaky boat.
Krehbeil, who didn't get a job in a month, still thought with senile
pride that he was a journeyman carpenter and cabinetmaker who could
make his solid way anywhere with his tool-box and his skill, and
that he could afford to look down on anything as disreputable as an
artist--even an artist who could carpenter as well as he did himself.

Labuerre had made Halvorsen learn carpentry, and Labuerre had been
right. You build a scaffold so you can sculp up high, not so it will
collapse and you break a leg. You build your platforms so they hold
the rock steady, not so it wobbles and chatters at every blow of the
chisel. You build your armatures so they hold the plasticine you slam
onto them.

But the help-wanted ads wanted no builders of scaffolds, platforms and
armatures. The factories were calling for setup men and maintenance men
for the production and assembly machines.

From upstate, General Vegetables had sent a recruiting team for farm
help--harvest setup and maintenance men, a few openings for experienced
operators of tank-caulking machinery. Under "office and professional"
the demand was heavy for computer men, for girls who could run the
I.B.M. Letteriter, esp. familiar sales and collections corresp., for
office machinery maintenance and repair men. A job printing house
wanted an esthetikon operator for letterhead layouts and the like. A.T.
& T. wanted trainees to earn while learning telephone maintenance. A
direct-mail advertising outfit wanted an artist--no, they wanted a
sales-executive who could scrawl picture-ideas that would be subjected
to the criticism and correction of the esthetikon.

Halvorsen leafed tiredly through the rest of the paper. He knew he
wouldn't get a job, and if he did he wouldn't hold it. He knew it was
a terrible thing to admit to yourself that you might starve to death
because you were bored by anything except art, but he admitted it.

It had happened often enough in the past--artists undergoing
preposterous hardships, not, as people thought, because they were
devoted to art, but because nothing else was interesting. If there
were only some impressive, sonorous word that summed up the aching,
oppressive futility that overcame him when he tried to get out of
art--only there wasn't.

He thought he could tell which of the photos in the tabloid had been
corrected by the esthetikon.

There was a shot of Jink Bitsy, who was to star in a remake of _Peter
Pan_. Her ears had been made to look not pointed but pointy, her upper
lip had been lengthened a trifle, her nose had been pugged a little and
tilted quite a lot, her freckles were cuter than cute, her brows were
innocently arched, and her lower lip and eyes were nothing less than
pornography.

There was a shot, apparently uncorrected, of the last Venus ship coming
in at La Guardia and the average-looking explorers grinning. Caption:
"Austin Malone and crew smile relief on safe arrival. Malone says Venus
colonies need men, machines. See story p. 2."

Petulantly, Halvorsen threw the paper under the table and walked
out. What had space travel to do with him? Vacations on the Moon and
expeditions to Venus and Mars were part of the deadly encroachment on
his livelihood and no more.


II

He took the subway to Passaic and walked down a long-still traffic
beltway to his studio, almost the only building alive in the slums near
the rusting railroad freightyard.

A sign that had once said "F. Labuerre, Sculptor--Portraits
and Architectural Commissions" now said "Roald Halvorsen; Art
Classes--Reasonable Fees." It was a grimy two-story frame building with
a shopfront in which were mounted some of his students' charcoal figure
studies and oil still-lifes. He lived upstairs, taught downstairs
front, and did his own work downstairs, back behind dirty, ceiling-high
drapes.

Going in, he noticed that he had forgotten to lock the door again. He
slammed it bitterly. At the noise, somebody called from behind the
drapes: "Who's that?"

"Halvorsen!" he yelled in a sudden fury. "I live here. I own this
place. Come out of there! What do you want?"

There was a fumbling at the drapes and a girl stepped between them,
shrinking from their dirt.

"Your door was open," she said firmly, "and it's a shop. I've just
been here a couple of minutes. I came to ask about classes, but I don't
think I'm interested if you're this bad-tempered."

A pupil. Pupils were never to be abused, especially not now.

"I'm terribly sorry," he said. "I had a trying day in the city." Now
turn it on. "I wouldn't tell everybody a terrible secret like this, but
I've lost a commission. You understand? I thought so. Anybody who'd
traipse out here to my dingy abode would be _simpatica_. Won't you
sit down? No, not there--humor an artist and sit over there. The warm
background of that still-life brings out your color--quite good color.
Have you ever been painted? You've a very interesting face, you know.
Some day I'd like to--but you mentioned classes.

"We have figure classes, male and female models alternating, on Tuesday
nights. For that I have to be very stern and ask you to sign up for
an entire course of twelve lessons at sixty dollars. It's the models'
fees--they're exorbitant. Saturday afternoons we have still-life
classes for beginners in oils. That's only two dollars a class, but you
might sign up for a series of six and pay ten dollars in advance, which
saves you two whole dollars. I also give private instructions to a few
talented amateurs."

The price was open on that one--whatever the traffic would bear. It had
been a year since he'd had a private pupil and she'd taken only six
lessons at five dollars an hour.

"The still-life sounds interesting," said the girl, holding her head
self-consciously the way they all did when he gave them the patter.
It was a good head, carried well up. The muscles clung close, not
yet slacked into geotropic loops and lumps. The line of youth is
heliotropic, he confusedly thought. "I saw some interesting things back
there. Was that your own work?"

She rose, obviously with the expectation of being taken into the
studio. Her body was one of those long-lined, small-breasted, coltish
jobs that the pre-Raphaelites loved to draw.

"Well--" said Halvorsen. A deliberate show of reluctance and then a
bright smile of confidence. "_You'll_ understand," he said positively
and drew aside the curtains.

"What a curious place!" She wandered about, inspecting the drums of
plaster, clay and plasticene, the racks of tools, the stands, the
stones, the chisels, the forge, the kiln, the lumber, the glaze bench.

"I _like_ this," she said determinedly, picking up a figure a
half-meter tall, a Venus he had cast in bronze while studying under
Labuerre some years ago. "How much is it?"

An honest answer would scare her off, and there was no chance in the
world that she'd buy. "I hardly ever put my things up for sale,"
he told her lightly. "That was just a little study. I do work on
commission only nowadays."

Her eyes flicked about the dingy room, seeming to take in its scaling
plaster and warped floor and see through the wall to the abandoned slum
in which it was set. There was amusement in her glance.

_I am not being honest, she thinks. She thinks that is funny. Very
well, I will be honest._ "Six hundred dollars," he said flatly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl set the figurine on its stand with a rap and said, half angry
and half amused: "I don't understand it. That's more than a month's pay
for me. I could get an S.P.G. statuette just as pretty as this for ten
dollars. Who do you artists think you are, anyway?"

Halvorsen debated with himself about what he could say in reply:

_An S.P.G. operator spends a week learning his skill and I spend a
lifetime learning mine._

_An S.P.G. operator makes a mechanical copy of a human form distorted
by formulae mechanically arrived at from psychotests of population
samples. I take full responsibility for my work; it is mine, though
I use what I see fit from Egypt, Greece, Rome, the Middle Ages, the
Renaissance, the Augustan and Romantic and Modern Eras._

_An S.P.G. operator works in soft, homogeneous plastic; I work in
bronze that is more complicated than you dream, that is cast and
acid-dipped today so it will slowly take on rich and subtle coloring
many years from today._

_An S.P.G. operator could not make an Orpheus Fountain_--

He mumbled, "Orpheus," and keeled over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Halvorsen awoke in his bed on the second floor of the building. His
fingers and toes buzzed electrically and he felt very clear-headed. The
girl and a man, unmistakably a doctor, were watching him.

"You don't seem to belong to any Medical Plans, Halvorsen," the doctor
said irritably. "There weren't any cards on you at all. No Red, no
Blue, no Green, no Brown."

"I used to be on the Green Plan, but I let it lapse," the artist said
defensively.

"And look what happened!"

"Stop nagging him!" the girl said. "I'll pay you your fee."

"It's supposed to come through a Plan," the doctor fretted.

"We won't tell anybody," the girl promised. "Here's five dollars. Just
stop nagging him."

"Malnutrition," said the doctor. "Normally I'd send him to a hospital,
but I don't see how I could manage it. He isn't on any Plan at all.
Look, I'll take the money and leave some vitamins. That's what he
needs--vitamins. And food."

"I'll see that he eats," the girl said, and the doctor left.

"How long since you've had anything?" she asked Halvorsen.

"I had some coffee today," he answered, thinking back. "I'd been
working on detail drawings for a commission and it fell through. I told
you that. It was a shock."

"I'm Lucretia Grumman," she said, and went out.

He dozed until she came back with an armful of groceries.

"It's hard to get around down here," she complained.

"It was Labuerre's studio," he told her defiantly. "He left it to me
when he died. Things weren't so rundown in his time. I studied under
him; he was one of the last. He had a joke--'They don't really want my
stuff, but they're ashamed to let me starve.' He warned me that they
wouldn't be ashamed to let _me_ starve, but I insisted and he took me
in."

Halvorsen drank some milk and ate some bread. He thought of the change
from the ten dollars in his pocket and decided not to mention it. Then
he remembered that the doctor had gone through his pockets.

"I can pay you for this," he said. "It's very kind of you, but you
mustn't think I'm penniless. I've just been too preoccupied to take
care of myself."

"Sure," said the girl. "But we can call this an advance. I want to sign
up for some classes."

"Be happy to have you."

"Am I bothering you?" asked the girl. "You said something odd when you
fainted--'Orpheus.'"

"Did I say that? I must have been thinking of Milles' Orpheus Fountain
in Copenhagen. I've seen photos, but I've never been there."

"Germany? But there's nothing left of Germany."

"Copenhagen's in Denmark. There's quite a lot of Denmark left. It was
only on the fringes. Heavily radiated, but still there."

"I want to travel, too," she said. "I work at La Guardia and I've never
been off, except for an orbiting excursion. I want to go to the Moon
on my vacation. They give us a bonus in travel vouchers. It must be
wonderful dancing under the low gravity."

Spaceport? Off? Low gravity? Terms belonging to the detested electronic
world of the stereopantograph in which he had no place.

"Be very interesting," he said, closing his eyes to conceal disgust.

"I _am_ bothering you. I'll go away now, but I'll be back Tuesday night
for the class. What time do I come and what should I bring?"

"Eight. It's charcoal--I sell you the sticks and paper. Just bring a
smock."

"All right. And I want to take the oils class, too. And I want to bring
some people I know to see your work. I'm sure they'll see something
they like. Austin Malone's in from Venus--he's a special friend of
mine."

"Lucretia," he said. "Or do some people call you Lucy?"

"Lucy."

"Will you take that little bronze you liked? As a thank you?"

"I can't do that!"

"Please. I'd feel much better about this. I really mean it."

She nodded abruptly, flushing, and almost ran from the room.

_Now why did I do that?_ he asked himself. He hoped it was because
he liked Lucy Grumman very much. He hoped it wasn't a cold-blooded
investment of a piece of sculpture that would never be sold, anyway,
just to make sure she'd be back with class fees and more groceries.


III

She was back on Tuesday, a half-hour early and carrying a smock. He
introduced her formally to the others as they arrived: a dozen or so
bored young women who, he suspected, talked a great deal about their
art lessons outside, but in class used any excuse to stop sketching.

He didn't dare show Lucy any particular consideration. There were
fierce little miniature cliques in the class. Halvorsen knew they
laughed at him and his line among themselves, and yet, strangely, were
fiercely jealous of their seniority and right to individual attention.

The lesson was an ordeal, as usual. The model, a muscle-bound young
graduate of the barbell gyms and figure-photography studios, was stupid
and argumentative about ten-minute poses. Two of the girls came near a
hair-pulling brawl over the rights to a preferred sketching location. A
third girl had discovered Picasso's cubist period during the past week
and proudly announced that she didn't _feel_ perspective in art.

But the two interminable hours finally ticked by. He nagged them into
cleaning up--not as bad as the Saturdays with oils--and stood by the
open door. Otherwise they would have stayed all night, cackling about
absent students and snarling sulkily among themselves. His well-laid
plans went sour, though. A large and flashy car drove up as the girls
were leaving.

"That's Austin Malone," said Lucy. "He came to pick me up and look at
your work."

That was all the wedge her fellow-pupils needed.

"_Aus_-tin Ma-_lone_! _Well!_"

"Lucy, darling, I'd love to meet a real _spaceman_."

"Roald, darling, would you mind very much if I stayed a moment?"

"I'm certainly not going to miss this and I don't care if you mind or
not, Roald, darling!"

Malone was an impressive figure. Halvorsen thought: he looks as though
he's been run through an esthetikon set for 'brawny' and 'determined.'
Lucy made a hash of the introductions and the spaceman didn't rise to
conversational bait dangled enticingly by the girls.

In a clear voice, he said to Halvorsen: "I don't want to take up too
much of your time. Lucy tells me you have some things for sale. Is
there any place we can look at them where it's quiet?"

The students made sulky exits.

"Back here," said the artist.

The girl and Malone followed him through the curtains. The spaceman
made a slow circuit of the studio, seeming to repel questions.

He sat down at last and said: "I don't know what to think, Halvorsen.
This place stuns me. Do you _know_ you're in the Dark Ages?"

_People who never have given a thought to Chartres and Mont St. Michel
usually call it the Dark Ages_, Halvorsen thought wryly. He asked,
"Technologically, you mean? No, not at all. My plaster's better, my
colors are better, my metal is better--tool metal, not casting metal,
that is."

"I mean _hand_ work," said the spaceman. "Actually working by _hand_."

The artist shrugged. "There have been crazes for the techniques of the
boiler works and the machine shop," he admitted. "Some interesting
things were done, but they didn't stand up well. Is there anything here
that takes your eye?"

"I like those dolphins," said the spaceman, pointing to a perforated
terra-cotta relief on the wall. They had been commissioned by an
architect, then later refused for reasons of economy when the house
had run way over estimate. "They'd look bully over the fireplace in my
town apartment. Like them, Lucy?"

"I think they're wonderful," said the girl.

Roald saw the spaceman go rigid with the effort not to turn and stare
at her. He loved her and he was jealous.

Roald told the story of the dolphins and said: "The price that the
architect thought was too high was three hundred and sixty dollars."

Malone grunted. "Doesn't seem unreasonable--if you set a high store on
inspiration."

"I don't know about inspiration," the artist said evenly. "But I was
awake for two days and two nights shoveling coal and adjusting drafts
to fire that thing in my kiln."

The spaceman looked contemptuous. "I'll take it," he said. "Be
something to talk about during those awkward pauses. Tell me,
Halvorsen, how's Lucy's work? Do you think she ought to stick with it?"

"Austin," objected the girl, "don't be so blunt. How can he possibly
know after one day?"

"She can't draw yet," the artist said cautiously. "It's all
coordination, you know--thousands of hours of practice, training your
eye and hand to work together until you can put a line on paper where
you want it. Lucy, if you're really interested in it, you'll learn to
draw well. I don't think any of the other students will. They're in it
because of boredom or snobbery, and they'll stop before they have their
eye-hand coordination."

"I _am_ interested," she said firmly.

Malone's determined restraint broke. "Damned right you are. In--" He
recovered himself and demanded of Halvorsen: "I understand your point
about coordination. But thousands of hours when you can buy a camera?
It's absurd."

"I was talking about drawing, not art," replied Halvorsen. "Drawing
is putting a line on paper where you want it, I said." He took a deep
breath and hoped the great distinction wouldn't sound ludicrous and
trivial. "So let's say that art is knowing how to put the line in the
right place."

"Be practical. There isn't any art. Not any more. I get around quite a
bit and I never see anything but photos and S.P.G.s. A few heirlooms,
yes, but nobody's painting or carving any more."

"There's some art, Malone. My students--a couple of them in the
still-life class--are quite good. There are more across the country.
Art for occupational therapy, or a hobby, or something to do with the
hands. There's trade in their work. They sell them to each other, they
give them to their friends, they hang them on their walls. There are
even some sculptors like that. Sculpture is prescribed by doctors. The
occupational therapists say it's even better than drawing and painting,
so some of these people work in plasticene and soft stone, and some of
them get to be good."

"Maybe so. I'm an engineer, Halvorsen. We glory in doing things the
easy way. Doing things the easy way got me to Mars and Venus and it's
going to get me to Ganymede. You're doing things the hard way, and your
inefficiency has no place in this world. Look at you! You've lost a
fingertip--some accident, I suppose."

"I never noticed--" said Lucy, and then let out a faint, "Oh!"

Halvorsen curled the middle finger of his left hand into the palm,
where he usually carried it to hide the missing first joint.

"Yes," he said softly. "An accident."

"Accidents are a sign of inadequate mastery of material and equipment,"
said Malone sententiously. "While you stick to your methods and I stick
to mine, _you can't compete with me_."

His tone made it clear that he was talking about more than engineering.

"Shall we go now, Lucy? Here's my card, Halvorsen. Send those dolphins
along and I'll mail you a check."


IV

The artist walked the half-dozen blocks to Mr. Krehbeil's place the
next day. He found the old man in the basement shop of his fussy house,
hunched over his bench with a powerful light overhead. He was trying to
file a saw.

"Mr. Krehbeil!" Halvorsen called over the shriek of metal.

The carpenter turned around and peered with watery eyes. "I can't see
like I used to," he said querulously. "I go over the same teeth on this
damn saw, I skip teeth, I can't see the light shine off it when I got
one set. The glare." He banged down his three-cornered file petulantly.
"Well, what can I do for you?"

"I need some crating stock. Anything. I'll trade you a couple of my
maple four-by-fours."

The old face became cunning. "And will you set my saw? My _saws_, I
mean. It's nothing to you--an hour's work. You have the eyes."

Halvorsen said bitterly, "All right." The old man had to drive his
bargain, even though he might never use his saws again. And then the
artist promptly repented of his bitterness, offering up a quick prayer
that his own failure to conform didn't make him as much of a nuisance
to the world as Krehbeil was.

The carpenter was pleased as they went through his small stock of wood
and chose boards to crate the dolphin relief. He was pleased enough to
give Halvorsen coffee and cake before the artist buckled down to filing
the saws.

Over the kitchen table, Halvorsen tried to probe. "Things pretty slow
now?"

It would be hard to spoil Krehbeil's day now. "People are always fools.
They don't know good hand work. Some day," he said apocalyptically, "I
laugh on the other side of my face when their foolish machine-buildings
go falling down in a strong wind, all of them, all over the country.
Even my boy--I used to beat him good, almost every day--he works a
foolish concrete machine and his house should fall on his head like the
rest."

Halvorsen knew it was Krehbeil's son who supported him by mail, and
changed the subject. "You get some cabinet work?"

"Stupid women! What they call antiques--they don't know Meissen, they
don't know Biedermeier. They bring me trash to repair sometimes. I make
them pay; I swindle them good."

"I wonder if things would be different if there were anything left over
in Europe...."

"People will still be fools, Mr. Halvorsen," said the carpenter
positively. "Didn't you say you were going to file those saws today?"

So the artist spent two noisy hours filing before he carried his
crating stock to the studio.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lucy was there. She had brought some things to eat. He dumped the
lumber with a bang and demanded: "Why aren't you at work?"

"We get days off," she said vaguely. "Austin thought he'd give me the
cash for the terra-cotta and I could give it to you."

She held out an envelope while he studied her silently. The farce was
beginning again. But this time he dreaded it.

It would not be the first time that a lonesome, discontented girl chose
to see him as a combination of romantic rebel and lost pup, with the
consequences you'd expect.

He knew from books, experience and Labuerre's conversation in the old
days that there was nothing novel about the comedy--that there had
even been artists, lots of them, who had counted on endless repetitions
of it for their livelihood.

The girl drops in with groceries and the artist is pleasantly
surprised; the girl admires this little thing or that after payday and
buys it and the artist is pleasantly surprised; the girl brings her
friends to take lessons or make little purchases and the artist is
pleasantly surprised. The girl may be seduced by the artist or vice
versa, which shortens the comedy, or they get married, which lengthens
it somewhat.

It had been three years since Halvorsen had last played out the farce
with a manic-depressive divorcee from Elmira: three years during which
he had crossed the mid-point between thirty and forty; three more years
to get beaten down by being unwanted and working too much and eating
too little.

Also, he knew, he was in love with this girl.

He took the envelope, counted three hundred and twenty dollars and
crammed it into his pocket. "That was your idea," he said. "Thanks. Now
get out, will you? I've got work to do."

She stood there, shocked.

"_I said get out. I have work to do._"

"Austin was right," she told him miserably. "You don't care how people
feel. You just want to get things out of them."

She ran from the studio, and Halvorsen fought with himself not to run
after her.

He walked slowly into his workshop and studied his array of tools,
though he paid little attention to his finished pieces. It would be
nice to spend about half of this money on open-hearth steel rod and
bar stock to forge into chisels; he thought he knew where he could get
some--but she would be back, or he would break and go to her and be
forgiven and the comedy would be played out, after all.

He couldn't let that happen.


V

Aalesund, on the Atlantic side of the Dourefeld mountains of Norway,
was in the lee of the blasted continent. One more archeologist there
made no difference, as long as he had the sense to recognize the
propellor-like international signposts that said with their three
blades, _Radiation Hazard_, and knew what every schoolboy knew about
protective clothing and reading a personal Geiger counter.

The car Halvorsen rented was for a brief trip over the mountains to
study contaminated Oslo. Well-muffled, he could make it and back in a
dozen hours and no harm done.

But he took the car past Oslo, Wennersborg and Goteborg, along the
Kattegat coast to Helsingborg, and abandoned it there, among the
three-bladed polyglot signs, crossing to Denmark. Danes were as unlike
Prussians as they could be, but their unfortunate little peninsula was
a sprout off Prussia which radio-cobalt dust couldn't tell from the
real thing. The three-bladed signs were most specific.

With a long way to walk along the rubble-littered highways, he stripped
off the impregnated coveralls and boots. He had long since shed the
noisy counter and the uncomfortable gloves and mask.

The silence was eerie as he limped into Copenhagen at noon. He didn't
know whether the radiation was getting to him or whether he was tired
and hungry and no more. As though thinking of a stranger, he liked what
he was doing.

_I'll be my own audience, he thought. God knows I learned there isn't
any other, not any more. You have to know when to stop. Rodin, the
dirty old, wonderful old man, knew that. He taught us not to slick it
and polish it and smooth it until it looked like liquid instead of
bronze and stone. Van Gogh was crazy as a loon, but he knew when to
stop and varnish it, and he didn't care if the paint looked like paint
instead of looking like sunset clouds or moonbeams. Up in Hartford,
Browne and Sharpe stop when they've got a turret lathe; they don't put
caryatids on it. I'll stop while my life is a life, before it becomes
a thing with distracting embellishments such as a wife who will come
to despise me, a succession of gradually less worthwhile pieces that
nobody will look at._

_Blame nobody_, he told himself, lightheadedly.

And then it was in front of him, terminating a vista of weeds and bomb
rubble--Milles' Orpheus Fountain.

It took a man, he thought. Esthetikon circuits couldn't do it. There
was a gross mixture of styles, a calculated flaw that the esthetikon
couldn't be set to make. Orpheus and the souls were classic or later;
the three-headed dog was archaic. That was to tell you about the
antiquity and invincibility of Hell, and that Cerberus knows Orpheus
will never go back into life with his bride.

There was the heroic, tragic central figure that looked mighty enough
to battle with the gods, but battle wasn't any good against the
grinning, knowing, hateful three-headed dog it stood on. You don't
battle the pavement where you walk or the floor of the house you're in;
you can't. So Orpheus, his face a mask of controlled and suffering
fury crashes a great chord from his lyre that moved trees and stones.
Around him the naked souls in Hell start at the chord, each in its own
way: the young lovers down in death; the mother down in death; the
musician, deaf and down in death, straining to hear.

Halvorsen, walking uncertainly toward the fountain, felt something
break inside him, and a heaviness in his lungs. As he pitched forward
among the weeds, he thought he heard the chord from the lyre and didn't
care that the three-headed dog was grinning its knowing, hateful grin
down at him.


VI

When Halvorsen awoke, he supposed he was in Hell. There were the young
lovers, arms about each other's waists, solemnly looking down at him,
and the mother was placidly smoothing his brow. He stirred and felt his
left arm fall heavily.

"Ah," said the mother, "you mustn't." He felt her pick up his limp arm
and lay it across his chest. "Your poor finger!" she sighed. "Can you
talk? What happened to it?"

He could talk, weakly. "Labuerre and I," he said. "We were moving a big
block of marble with the crane--somehow the finger got under it. I
didn't notice until it was too late to shift my grip without the marble
slipping and smashing on the floor."

The boy said in a solemn, adolescent croak: "You mean you saved the
marble and lost your finger?"

"Marble," he muttered. "It's so hard to get. Labuerre was so old."

The young lovers exchanged a glance and he slept again. He was half
awake when the musician seized first one of his hands and then the
other, jabbing them with stubby fingers and bending his lion's head
close to peer at the horny callouses left by chisel and mallet.

"_Ja, ja_," the musician kept saying.

Hell goes on forever, so for an eternity he jolted and jarred, and for
an eternity he heard bickering voices: "Why he was so foolish, then?"
"A idiot he could be." "Hush, let him rest." "The children told the
story." "There only one Labuerre was." "Easy with the tubing." "Let him
rest."

Daylight dazzled his eyes.

"Why you were so foolish?" demanded a harsh voice. "The sister says I
can talk to you now, so that is what I first want to know."

He looked at the face of--not the musician; that had been delirium. But
it was a tough old face.

"_Ja_, I am mean-looking; that is settled. What did you think you were
doing without coveralls and way over your exposure time?"

"I wanted to die," said Halvorsen. There were tubes sticking in his
arms.

The crag-faced old man let out a contemptuous bellow.

"Sister!" he shouted. "Pull the plasma tubes out before more we waste.
He says he wants to die."

"Hush," said the nurse. She laid her hand on his brow again.

"Don't bother with him, Sister," the old man jeered. "He is a shrinking
little flower, too delicate for the great, rough world. He has done
nothing, he can do nothing, so he decides to make of himself a nuisance
by dying."

"You lie," said Halvorsen. "I worked. Good God, how I worked! Nobody
wanted my work. They wanted me, to wear in their buttonholes like a
flower. They were getting to me. Another year and I wouldn't have been
an artist any more."

"_Ja?_" asked the old man. "Tell me about it."

Halvorsen told him, sometimes weeping with self-pity and weakness,
sometimes cursing the old man for not letting him die, sometimes
quietly describing this statuette or that portrait head, or raving
wildly against the mad folly of the world.

At the last he told the old man about Lucy.

"You cannot have everything, you know," said his listener.

"I can have her," answered the artist harshly. "You wouldn't let me
die, so I won't die. I'll go back and I'll take her away from that
fat-head Malone that she ought to marry. I'll give her a couple of
happy years working herself to skin and bones for me before she begins
to hate it--before I begin to hate it."

"You can't go back," said the old man. "I'm Cerberus. You understand
that? The girl is nothing. The society you come from is nothing. We
have a place here.... Sister, can he sit up?"

The woman smiled and cranked his bed. Halvorsen saw through a picture
window that he was in a mountain-rimmed valley that was very green and
dotted with herds and unpainted houses.

"Such a place there had to be," said the old man. "In the whole
geography of Europe, there had to be a Soltau Valley with winds and
terrain just right to deflect the dust."

"Nobody knows?" whispered the artist.

"We prefer it that way. It's impossible to get some things, but you
would be surprised how little difference it makes to the young people.
They are great travelers, the young people, in their sweaty coveralls
with radiation meters. They think when they see the ruined cities that
the people who lived in them must have been mad. It was a little travel
party like that which found you. The boy was impressed by something you
said, and I saw some interesting things in your hands. There isn't much
rock around here; we have fine deep topsoil. But the boys could get you
stone.

"There should be a statue of the Mayor for one thing, before I die.
And from the Rathaus the wooden angels have mostly broken off. Soltau
Valley used to be proud of them--could you make good copies? And of
course cameras are useless and the best drawings we can do look funny.
Could you teach the youngers at least to draw so faces look like faces
and not behinds? And like you were saying about you and Labuerre, maybe
one younger there will be so crazy that he will want to learn it all,
so Soltau will always have an artist and sculptor for the necessary
work. And you will find a Lucy or somebody better. I think better."

"Hush," warned the nurse. "You're exciting the patient."

"It's all right," said Halvorsen eagerly. "Thanks, but it's really all
right."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of With These Hands, by C.M. Kornbluth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH THESE HANDS ***

***** This file should be named 51531.txt or 51531.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/5/3/51531/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
